feat: plugins as services (#16852)
argoproj/argo-cd: docs/operator-manual/config-management-plugins.md

## Installing a config management plugin

> ### Sidecar or services plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sidecar or service plugin
```

> An operator can configure a plugin tool via a sidecar to the repo-server, or as a Kubernetes service in the same cluster
> as Argo CD. The following changes are required to configure a new plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An operator can configure a plugin tool as a repo-server sidecar or as a Kubernetes service. The following changes are required to configure a new plugin:
```

I think the cluster constraint is something people would assume. (And notably, the actual thing doesn't have to be in the same cluster as you note by `ExternalName` below.)

## Installing a config management plugin

### Sidecar or services plugin

> An operator can configure a plugin tool via a sidecar to repo-server, or as a kubernetes service in the same cluster

Author: Agree, done

      - |
        echo "{\"kind\": \"ConfigMap\", \"apiVersion\": \"v1\", \"metadata\": { \"name\": \"$ARGOCD_APP_NAME\", \"namespace\": \"$ARGOCD_APP_NAMESPACE\", \"annotations\": {\"Foo\": \"$ARGOCD_ENV_FOO\", \"KubeVersion\": \"$KUBE_VERSION\", \"KubeApiVersion\": \"$KUBE_API_VERSIONS\",\"Bar\": \"baz\"}}}"
  # The discovery config is applied to a repository. If every configured discovery tool matches, then the plugin may be
  # used to generate manifests for Applications using the repository. If the discovery config is omitted then the plugin
  # will not match any application but can still be invoked explicitly by specifying the plugin name in the app spec.
  # Only one of fileName, find.glob, or find.command should be specified. If multiple are specified then only the
  # first (in that order) is evaluated.
  discover:
    # fileName is a glob pattern (https://pkg.go.dev/path/filepath#Glob) that is applied to the Application's source
    # directory. If there is a match, this plugin may be used for the Application.
    fileName: "./subdir/s*.yaml"
    find:

>       # This does the same thing as fileName, but it supports double-start (nested directory) glob patterns.

Author: Done

application repository is supported by the plugin or not. The `find` command should return a non-error exit code
and produce output to stdout when the application source type is supported.

#### Place the plugin configuration file in the plugin's runtime environment

Argo CD expects the plugin configuration file to be located at `/home/argocd/cmp-server/config/plugin.yaml` in the sidecar
or pod behind your service.

If you use a custom image for the plugin, you can add the file directly to that image.

```dockerfile
WORKDIR /home/argocd/cmp-server/config/
COPY plugin.yaml ./
```

> If you use a stock image for the sidecar or would rather maintain the plugin configuration in a ConfigMap, just nest the

Author: Yes, done.

    2. Make sure that sidecar container is running as user 999.
    3. Make sure that plugin configuration file is present at `/home/argocd/cmp-server/config/plugin.yaml`. It can either be volume mapped via configmap or baked into image.

#### Register the plugin as a service

Argo CD needs to have access to the cluster to discover services. To do this it uses a standard Kubernetes Service Account token to authenticate
with the cluster. It also needs a Role or ClusterRole bound to that Service Account to access with the permissions `get`, `list` and `watch` the namespace(s)
that the services are in. By default (no configuration) the services are looked for in the same namespace as the argocd-repo-server. You can set
`ARGOCD_SERVICE_PLUGINS_NAMESPACE` on the `argocd-repo-server` to the name of a namespace to change it to look in that namespace instead. To
look in all namespaces set `ARGOCD_SERVICE_PLUGINS_NAMESPACE` to `*`. You cannot configure multiple specific namespaces, either one specific
namespace or all namespaces.

!!! Ensure that:
    1. The argocd-repo-server deployment has `automountServiceAccountToken: true`

> 	2. The argocd-repo-server's service account has a role binding allowing `get`, `list` and `watch` on services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. The argocd-repo-server's service account has a role binding allowing `get`, `list` and `watch` on services.
```

  name: my-plugin-config
- emptyDir: {}
  name: cmp-tmp
```

!!! important "Double-check these items"
    1. Make sure to use `/var/run/argocd/argocd-cmp-server` as an entrypoint. The `argocd-cmp-server` is a lightweight GRPC service that allows Argo CD to interact with the plugin.
    2. Make sure that sidecar container is running as user 999.
    3. Make sure that plugin configuration file is present at `/home/argocd/cmp-server/config/plugin.yaml`. It can either be volume mapped via configmap or baked into image.

#### Register the plugin as a service

> Argo CD needs to have access to the cluster to discover services. To do this it uses a standard kubernetes service account token to authenticate

Reviewer 2: "kubernetes" with a big K please.

Reviewer 2: (and probably "Service Account"? I forget.

> with the cluster. It also needs a Role or ClusterRole bound to that Service Account to access with the permissions get, list and watch the namespace(s)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the cluster. It also needs a Role or ClusterRole bound to that Service Account to access with the permissions `get`, `list` and `watch` the namespace(s)
```

that the services are in. By default (no configuration) the services are looked for in the same namespace as the argocd-repo-server. You can set

> `ARGOCD_SERVICE_PLUGINS_NAMESPACE` to the name of a namespace to change it to look in a different namespace. To look in all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ARGOCD_SERVICE_PLUGINS_NAMESPACE` to the name of a namespace to change it to look in that namespace instead. To look in all
```

> namespaces set `ARGOCD_SERVICE_PLUGINS_NAMESPACE` to `*`. You cannot configure multiple specific namespaces, just one namespace or all namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
namespaces set `ARGOCD_SERVICE_PLUGINS_NAMESPACE` to `*`. You cannot configure multiple specific namespaces, either one specific namespace or all namespaces.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: Role
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
  namespace: argocd
rules:
- apiGroups:
    - ""
  resources:
    - services
  verbs:
    - get
    - list
    - watch
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: RoleBinding
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
  namespace: argocd
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: Role
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: argocd-repo-server
  namespace: argocd
```

or for cluster wide

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
rules:
- apiGroups:
    - ""
  resources:
    - services
  verbs:
    - get
    - list
    - watch
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: argocd-repo-server
  namespace: argocd
```

To install a plugin as a service, deploy something running your code. This would usually be a deployment, but Argo CD doesn't

> actually care what is behind the service. You can use either an off-the-shelf or custom-built plugin image as sidecar image. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actually care what is behind the service. You can use either an off-the-shelf or custom-built plugin image. This
```

I think you're trying to say you could recycle a sidecar image for use as a pod, but I don't think that detail helps.... at least, not as written.

should follow the same rules as for a sidecar.

> To advertise the service to Argo CD you must provide a service with the label `argocd.argoproj.io/plugin: true`. Each port in the
> service will be treated as a separate plugin, and the name of the port is the name of the plugin, which will be used by applications
> which specify their plugin by name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To advertise the service to Argo CD you must provide a service with the label `argocd.argoproj.io/plugin: true`.
Each port in the service will be treated as a separate plugin.
The name of the port is used as the name of the plugin.
Applications can specify a plugin by the plugin name.
```

Author: Good suggestion - I've modified it slightly but take it in.

This might look like:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: myplugin
  namespace: argocd
  labels:
    argocd.argoproj.io/plugin: "true"
spec:
  ports:
  - name: myplugin
    port: 8080
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: cmp
  selector:
    k8s-app: myplugin
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: myplugin
  name: myplugin
  namespace: argocd
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      k8s-app: myplugin
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        k8s-app: myplugin
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: myplugin
        image: myrepo/myplugin:latest
        imagePullPolicy: Always
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080
          name: cmp
          protocol: TCP
```

!!! important "Double-check these items"
    1. Make sure to use `argocd-cmp-server` as an entrypoint from the same version of Argo CD. The `argocd-cmp-server` is a lightweight GRPC service that allows Argo CD to interact with the plugin.

>     2. Make sure that sidecar container is running as user 999.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Make sure that container is running as user 999.
```
?

    3. Make sure that plugin configuration file is present at `/home/argocd/cmp-server/config/plugin.yaml`. It can either be volume mapped via configmap or baked into image.

> 	4. The **service** has the label `argocd.argoproj.io/plugin: "true"`
> 	5. If you are calling the plugin by name that the **port** name is what you use to call it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    4. The **service** has the label `argocd.argoproj.io/plugin: "true"`
    5. If you are calling the plugin by name that the **port** name is what you use to call it.
```

If you'd like to disable this feature do not provide a service account token.

#### Choosing between sidecar and service plugins

If you are debugging your plugin, choose a service to start with. You can then restart the deployments behind the service without
needing to restart Argo CD. You could also easily develop in an in-cluster development environment this way. If you want to develop
locally and your cluster can reach your local machine you could even develop using an ExternalName service.

For large mono-repos sidecars will continue to work where services will take longer to transfer the state to the plugin. Argo CD

> doesn't condone large repos anyway. Because the network traffic between the repo-server and the plugin is over a unix socket it is by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
doesn't condone large repos in any way. Because the network traffic between the repo-server and the plugin is over a unix socket it is by
```

Author: I've just removed the words instead.

> doesn't condone large repos anyway. Because the network traffic between the repo-server and the plugin is over a unix socket it is by
> default more secure.

Reviewer: This sentence is buried in an odd place.

```suggestion
doesn't condone large repos anyway. Sidecar plugins (where the repo-server connects over a unix socket) are by
default more secure than service plugins.
```

  name: my-plugin-config
- emptyDir: {}
  name: cmp-tmp
```

!!! important "Double-check these items"
    1. Make sure to use `/var/run/argocd/argocd-cmp-server` as an entrypoint. The `argocd-cmp-server` is a lightweight GRPC service that allows Argo CD to interact with the plugin.
    2. Make sure that sidecar container is running as user 999.
    3. Make sure that plugin configuration file is present at `/home/argocd/cmp-server/config/plugin.yaml`. It can either be volume mapped via configmap or baked into image.

#### Register the plugin as a service

Argo CD needs to have access to the cluster to discover services. To do this it uses the service account token to gain access

> to the cluster. It also needs a Role or ClusterRole bound to that service account to access the namespace(s) that it the

Author: See if this works better.

> to the cluster. It also needs a Role or ClusterRole bound to that service account to access the namespace(s) that it the

Reviewer 2: it seems to now be words that make sense when combined. Thanks

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: Role
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
  namespace: argocd
rules:
- apiGroups:
    - ""
  resources:
    - services
  verbs:
    - get
    - list
    - watch
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: RoleBinding
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
  namespace: argocd
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: Role
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: argocd-repo-server
  namespace: argocd
```

or for cluster wide

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
rules:
- apiGroups:
    - ""
  resources:
    - services
  verbs:
    - get
    - list
    - watch
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: argocd-repo-server-getsvcs
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: argocd-repo-server
  namespace: argocd
```

To install a plugin as a service, deploy something running your code. This would usually be a deployment, but Argo CD doesn't

> actually care what is behind the service. You can use either off-the-shelf or custom-built plugin image as sidecar image. This should

Author: Done

  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        k8s-app: myplugin
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: myplugin
        image: myrepo/myplugin:latest
        imagePullPolicy: Always
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080
          name: cmp
          protocol: TCP
```

!!! important "Double-check these items"
    1. Make sure to use `argocd-cmp-server` as an entrypoint from the same version of Argo CD. The `argocd-cmp-server` is a lightweight GRPC service that allows Argo CD to interact with the plugin.
    2. Make sure that sidecar container is running as user 999.
    3. Make sure that plugin configuration file is present at `/home/argocd/cmp-server/config/plugin.yaml`. It can either be volume mapped via configmap or baked into image.
	4. The **service** has the label `argocd.argoproj.io/plugin: "true"`
	5. If you are calling the plugin by name that the **port** name is what you use to call it.

If you'd like to disable this feature do not provide a service account token.

#### Choosing between sidecar and service plugins

If you are debugging your plugin, choose a service to start with. You can then restart the deployments behind the service without

> needing to restart Argo CD. You could also easilly develop in an in cluster development environment this way. If you want to develop

Author: Done

> needing to restart Argo CD. You could also easilly develop in an in cluster development environment this way. If you want to develop

Author: Yup

locally and your cluster can reach your local machine you could even develop using an ExternalName service.

> For large mono-repos then sidecars will continue to work where services will take longer to transfer the state to the plugin. Argo CD

Reviewer 2: >then

do we need "then" then?

Author: No. I just like to give then a chance.

4. Verify your sidecar has started properly by viewing the Pod and seeing that two containers are running `kubectl get pod -l app.kubernetes.io/component=repo-server -n argocd`
5. Write log message to stderr and set the `--loglevel=info` flag in the sidecar. This will print everything written to stderr, even on successfull command execution.

## Debugging a CMP as a service

> If you are actively developing a services based CMP then things should be more familiar than as a sidecar. You still need to bear in mind that CMP errors are cached by the repo-server in Redis. Restarting the repo-server Pod will not clear the cache. Always do a "Hard Refresh" when actively developing a CMP so you have the latest output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are actively developing a service based CMP then things should be more familiar than as a sidecar. You still need to bear in mind that CMP errors are cached by the repo-server in Redis. Restarting the repo-server Pod will not clear the cache. Always do a "Hard Refresh" when actively developing a CMP so you have the latest output.
```

4. Verify your sidecar has started properly by viewing the Pod and seeing that two containers are running `kubectl get pod -l app.kubernetes.io/component=repo-server -n argocd`
5. Write log message to stderr and set the `--loglevel=info` flag in the sidecar. This will print everything written to stderr, even on successfull command execution.

## Debugging a CMP as a service

> If you are actively developing a services based CMP then things should be more familiar than as a sidecar. You still need to bare in mind that CMP errors are cached by the repo-server in Redis. Restarting the repo-server Pod will not clear the cache. Always do a "Hard Refresh" when actively developing a CMP so you have the latest output.

Reviewer 2: should be "bear in mind"

Author: I was thinking of bears.
